---
title: "A Comprehensive MemLabs 1 Writeup Guide"
date: 2024-07-15 11:13:00 +0100
categories: [CTF]
tags: [memory forensics, digital forensics]
math: true
comments: false
---
Before you read this article, please try solving the lab on your own, and only refer back here if you get stuck.

A bit of background on MemLabs: these  practice labs are created by stuxnet999(P. Abhiram Kumar), the former captain of teambi0s, a top Indian CTF team. There are 6 labs available in the [Memlabs repository](https://github.com/stuxnet999/MemLabs/tree/master). Although these labs are 3 to 5 years old, they are still highly relevant for testing my memory forensics skills. In this challenge, I primarily use Volatility 3, but occasionally Volatility 2 is used, which will be clearly indicated in the code.

**Challenge category**
Memory Forensics, Windows

**Challenge difficulty**
Easy

**Date**
July 2020

**About Memlabs**
MemLabs is an educational, introductory set of CTF-styled challenges which is aimed to encourage students, security researchers and also CTF players to get started with the field of Memory Forensics. “I’d suggest everyone use The Volatility Framework for analysing the memory images”, the main tool being used is going to be Volatility.

Now lets start with the lab. The scenario given to us is:
> My sister's computer crashed. We were very fortunate to recover this memory dump. Your job is get all her important files from the system. From what we remember, we suddenly saw a black window pop up with some thing being executed. When the crash happened, she was trying to draw something. Thats all we remember from the time of crash.

## How to approach memory forensics

To conduct memory forensics, there is a general approach. In each step, the following artifacts are examined:

1. Identify suspicious processes
   1. Name, location, parentprocess, commandline, start time and security IDs;
2. Analyze the DLLs and handles of processes
   1. DLLs, handles and commandline;
3. Investigate network artifacts
   1. Ports, connections and processes;
4. Search for evidence of code injection and rootkits
   1. Unlinked processes, unlinked DLLs, executable memory sections;
5. Dump suspicious processes and/or other data
   1. System Service Descriptor Table (SSDT), Interrupt Descript Table (IDT), Import Address Table (IAT) and I/O Request Packets (IRP);

## 0. Start

The first thing that stands out in the scenario is a black window pop-up indicating that something was executed, and that she was drawing something during the crash.

So after spinning up the virtal machine made for this memory forensics series and downloading the memory dump, lets fire up our volatility and get to work.

## 1. Identify Suspicious Processes

The first thing we want to know is which processes were running when the computer crashed, in this case when the memor dump was taken. To check that, we run the following command:

'''
$ python3 vol.py -f ../Documents/MemLabs/01/Memorydump_Lab1.raw windows.pslist
'''
